Monitoring Mum

Many people have an elderly relative who lives alone. Eventually this
becomes a worry.  Making daily visits or even twice-daily phonecalls
is not an option for most people, and the elderly relative might not
appreciate it either.

Some less intrusive way to provide reassurance and to raise the alarm
when needed would be a great help to many people. Experience shows that
alarm call buttons do not help, as many elderly people simply forget
what they are for, so a system that does not require any action or
change in behaviour is needed. Some people use webcams for this job,
but they are very intrusive and should not be installed inside a home
without very good reason.

A better option would be a passive system that makes sure the elderly
person is going about their normal daily routine, and raises the alarm
if there is a significant change. This respects the privacy of active
people while providing reassurance to relatives.

Ideally, such a system should be installable by someone with minimal
technical knowledge:

	* Buy a Monitoring Mum kit, which arrives in a single box.
	* Unpack it and spread the parts around Mum's house
	* Use a simple website to list contacts to be informed of problems

To be that simple would require:

	1)	Most sensors to be battery powered, with a battery life
		of a year or more
	2)	Wireless comms for everything
	3)	No requirement for an existing home network
	4)	A central trustworthy website to act as control and
		alarm distribution point
	5)	A learning algorithm to determine 'normal behaviour'

Meeting all requirements at a reasonable price would be a challenge,
but how close can we get?

I would like to do this with an open-source open-hardware model so that
the trustworthiness of the whole system can be demonstrated.

There is a business to be made from selling hardware and running the
central service on a subscription basis. An example of this is TrueCall
who sell malicious-call blockers and charge a yearly fee for the web
dashboard.

Consumers would be protected against the failure of the monitoring
service by the open-source code. Any motivated techie would be able to
run such a service and there would be a way to re-configure the hardware
to work with it, This also allows for 'closed network' setups for the
very security-conscious.

There is probably a trade-off between number of sensors and effective
self-learning. More sensors gives more information to work with. Maybe
we start with a small number and insist that they go in specific places:

	Kitchen
	Bathroom / Toilet
	Lounge
	Bedroom

A fairly simple algorithm would be able to give an alarm within a few
hours based on the assumption that an active person will visit each type
of space at least once per day.

Sensors would measure:

	Movement - PIR and/or ultrasonics and/or microwave doppler
	Temperature
	Light
	Noise? e.g. listen for smoke alarms?
	Their own health and battery state

The starter kit would have a mains-powered controller and a few
sensors. The controller would act as WiFi access point or equivalent
for the sensors. We should assume that there will be several of these
kits installed in close proximity: they must not be able to interfere
with each other.

There should be an easy and secure way to add more sensors to the
setup. Maybe a special WiFi SSID that is only used for setup, plus a
device ID that can be typed into the management site or loaded from a
QR code.

The controller would need mobile-phone-based Internet access to avoid
depending on in-house networking.  A cheaper option would omit that but
would require a more technical setup process.

There should be apps for Android and for iPhone to receive alerts.

The product version should not be called Monitoring Mum! Lassie might
be a better choice if Disney don't hold the copyright...

